2023-04-21
1.
Rebooted the shmup because I didn't want to deal with the spaghetti code in SpaceFighter. It's probably not as bad to most programmers
as it was to me, because the program was relatively small. Restarting was a good idea tho, because I can rethink some fundamentals.

First of all I'm not calling the main menu through the level anymore. In main.py I'm declaring the gamestate. If the gamestate is
'mainmenu', we're generating the main menu. Alternatively, we can run 'level'. I like this setup, since I can easily call new levels.

I'm also using a timestep that measures how long it took to run the game loop. Everything that runs as a function of time is dependent 
on this timestep. This includes all movement and the enemy spawning. Using a timestep ensures that the program runs consistently on different
hardware. It also allows for more accurate behaviour. I hope the program can be called deterministic at this point so far, which allows
for the option to replay a run. I can now also introduce slowdown, which can be used to allow for complex bullet patterns while retaining
playability. Slowdown could also be a power for the player. I'll definitely use it to test patterns, since I'm not that good of a shmup player.

I've introduced lanes for the spawning of enemies. This gives a good tool for balanced level design.

I've recalculated the borders, so we have a 3:4 ratio, which I believe is the standard for shmups.

One feature that I'd like to implement is the creation of enemy waves and sections of the level through different classes. This allows the
level class to not get cluttered with a huge list of enemies spawning. Instead there'll be a list of waves that are called sequentially. 
The actual spawning will get relegated to the Wave class. I'll have to join lists of sprites for rendering in level, but I think I can make
that work.

I've created a deadline for this project, which'll be two months. The goal is to have a working prototype within that time.
I'll need one level, which means designing a challenge. 

I've decided to create 5 enemy sprites. 
I'll need 3 different enemy bullet types, with 2 different colors. Ofcourse I need player bullet sprites as well.
I'll also need sprites for the boss, and a player sprite.
I'll definitely need explosion sprites.
A background and particles would be cool, but they're less important than the other sprites.
A more neat border image, maybe a nice main menu are also less important.

I'll create one audiotrack for the level, and one for the boss. I think I already have a fitting tune for the end screen.
Sound effects are important, but are also optional if I'm ahead of schedule.

A cool gimmick to add would be options for the player, which are like little turrets that travel along with the player and help. A lot of
shmups use them, and I think they're pretty cool.

Designing the level is the most work. I'll figure out some way to organize the waves, and I'll start working on that.

The one thing that is missing from the code right now that I want to salvage from the previous draft is the bullets. I didn't really 
finish the challenges that I set for myself, but I'm a bit bored of progressing that way. I'll figure it out once I want to use it
when designing the level. 